Fake Currency Detection using Deep Learning Technique
INTRODUCTION
Counterfeiting refers to an illegal copy of the currency 
of origin. Therefore, counterfeit currency is not approved by 
the government. RBI is the only body responsible for printing 
banknotes in India. Every year, the RBI has to deal with the 
problem of counterfeit banknotes once filtered and placed on 
the market. Currently with the development of better image
processing methods, new methods for identification of 
currency is designed by analysing specific safety information 
present in the currency. The safety features are watermarks, 
hidden images, security threads, and optically variable inks. 
Therefore, to determine the currency using image processing, 
extract the specific statistics from the currency image and select 
the correct recognition approach. The main methods for 
currency recognition is by characteristic geometric size [1] and 
by characteristic texture [2]. The general steps followed by 
image processing approach is to acquire image, to detect edge, 
to convert image to gray scale, feature extraction, image 
segmentation and decision making [3-4]. The drawback of 
these approaches are detection efficiency is less since feature 
extraction is a challenging task. To overcome this problem now 
the trend is towards deep learning, since it is a multilayer neural 
network. The deep neural network is effective for different 
application in real time.
In general, to form a deep neural network, we need a 
large set of image data for the activity to be done. But thanks 
to transfer learning technique, we only need a small amount of 
data sets. What we do is take a model already trained in a large 
data set and use our weights to reconstruct the small data set 
we have. In this way, a large data set is not necessary and the 
model is also designed correctly. Hence in this paper 
II. BACKGROUND STUDY (LITERATURE)
in every proposed system developed using various algorithms 
has their own disadvantages one of the most effective methods 
of counteracting counterfeiting can be to use easily accessible 
and effective software to detect counterfeit currency database 
under training set is trained using these algorithms a method 
for determining the currency in real time for classifying the 
currency is proposed the currency of image acquisition is based 
on currency discovery when the size of various denominations 
is obtained and the features are extracted it gives the 
information to kohonens training network this scheme is good 
with high speed and recognition accuracy in support vector 
machine based currency recognition is presented it segments 
our currency into various regions with our own core linear 
weighing through various forms of basic training matrices and 
is studied using semi-defined programming are used to obtain 
ideal weights use of rgb and hsv shade astral model in the 
image processing helps in legal tender detection with new 500 
and 2000 notes it can be detected faster by making samples of 
these banknotes this system used for automatic legal tender 
recognition based on resemblance processing the legal tender 
resemblance is speak for in the space of differences therefore 
is a angle astral composed by contrast the resemblance and a 
series of prototypes each measurement measures the 
dissimilarity in the middle of the resemblance in question with 
the prototype to distinguish between two images the local key 
points of each resemblance are identified and described based 
on legal tender characteristics it is possible to effectively 
identify the relevant key points between two resemblance due 
to the limited number of real-life counterfeit currencies svm is 
used to detect counterfeit currencies so only authentic 
currencies are required for authentication and to train classifier 
10 in recent years counterfeiting using neural network is good 
at detection in 11 it was found that the functions were passed 
through direct feed forward neural network fnn and is therefore 
used for legal tender recognition as well as verification to 
detect it uses the color information mined from currency but it 
leads to high risk of error and also makes the empirical 
consequence to be less accurate an approach additionally back 
propagation network and principal component analysis when 
used for feature extraction the approach is successful with an 
additional investigation 12 in convolutional based neural 
network when the number of layers are more then complexity 
is also more 13 but convolution neural network is robust and 
detection speed is faster 14 in 15 the problem of stochastic 
gradient slope sgd is been explored and points out due to sgd 
tilt the previous set of random parameters drops sharply then it 
may affect the overall performance of the detection process 
hence in our presented method we have used convolutional 
neural network with adam optimization to detect fake legal 
tender note
III. METHODOLOGY
In this proposed system, our relevance is to focus on detection 
of fake currencies which is spread in Indian market. In our 
work fake currency is identified by extracting the security 
thread feature in the currency note. For detecting the fake 
currency, the most popular method in deep neural network 
called transfer learning using Alex net is adopted. Alex net 
consists of convolutions, max pooling, dropout, ReLU 
activations and fully-connected layers. In transfer learning the last three 
layers are fine tuned to accommodate the requirement of our 
proposed work. The ‘fc8’ layer is tuned with a weight learning 
factor and bias learning factor for accurately extracting the 
latent feature from the image. The weight gives the impact of 
the input on the network and bias is used to adjust the output 
with weighted sum of inputs to the neuron. The accuracy of 
learning feature grows with the weight and bias learning factor, 
record is given as information. After the effective finishing of 
activity the outcome is anticipated and shown
The input image is usually two-dimensional, so the object 
map is also two-dimensional. The convolution layer applies a 
specified number of filters to the input image. The mechanism 
is as follows. The filter is an array of numbers the same size as 
the input image. This filter moves to each pixel value and 
multiplies by each filter number by the corresponding pixel 
value in which it is positioned and calculates multiplication by 
element. For each pixel position, each multiplication is added 
to make it an element of the output matrix called a feature map.
Another parameter to consider is the stride. This is the 
amount of pixels that the strainer matrix moves each time it is 
moved to a different position on the input image. As a general 
rule, the passage is 1, which allows us to leave all the 
decreasing spatial samples for POOL levels. An element of the 
smart activation function is applied after each convolution 
layer. Using the activation function, network linearity is 
interrupted to detect more complex linear regression functions. 
The function for activating a rectified linear unit is defined as 
max (0, x). The spatial contact of the output data obtained from 
the single feature map and the total values of the secondary 
matrix value help to describe the value of the physical domain. 
Select maximum grouping, which simply shows maximum 
activation as seen in the region. The maximum coupling 
operation for a 2x2 matrix 
aram Nayak for his valuable 
suggestion, expert advice and moral support in the process of 
preparing this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] D-F Wang, and S-W Lian, “Automatic selling tickets machine on 
railway station and cash recognition technology”, Computer 
System Applications, Vol. 7, pp. 12-14, 1999
[2] Z-X Ymg, Z-B Qian and J-G Li. “Currency recognition using 
mathematical morphology and neural networks”, Journal of 
Shanghai Jiaotong University, Vol. 33, No. 9, pp. 1142-1145, 1999
[3] R Mirza, and V Nanda, “Design and implementation of Indian 
paper currency authentication system based on feature extraction by 
edge based segmentation using Sobel operator”, International 
Journal of Engineering Research and Development, Vol. 3, No. 2, 
pp. 41-46, 2012.
[4] J Guo, Y Zhao, and A Cai, “A reliable method for paper currency 
recognition based on LBP”, IEEE International Conference on
Network Infrastructure and Digital Content, pp. 359-363, 2010. 
[5] PJ Grace, and A Sheema, “A survey on fake Indian paper currency 
identification system”, International Journal of Advanced Research 
in Computer Science and Software Engineering, Vol. 6, No. 7, July 
2016. 
[6] S T Gouri, PK Akshay, M Sneha, and S Bharat, “Detection of fake 
Indian currency”, International Journal of Advance Research, Ideas 
and Innovations in Technology, Vol. 4, No. 2, pp. 170-176, 2018.
[7] E H Zhang, B Jiang, JH Duan, and ZZ Bian, “Research on paper 
currency recognition by neural networks. In: International 
conference on machine learning and cybernetics, Vol. 4, pp. 2193–
2197, 2003
[8] C Y Yeh, WP Su, and SJ Lee, “Employing multiple-kernel support 
vector machines for counterfeit banknote recognition”, Applied 
Soft Computing (Elsevier), Vol. 11, No. 1, pp. 1439–1447, 2011
[9] M A Kumar, B Bhuvaneswari, and D Dhanasekaran, “Detection 
and recognition of counterfeit currency notes”, International 
Journal of Pure and Applied Mathematics, Vol. 119, No. 17, pp. 
1535-1540, 2018. 
[10] M Patil, J Adhikari, R Babu, “Fake currency detection using image 
processing”, International Journal on Future Revolution in 
Computer Science & Communication Engineering, Vol. 4, No. 4, 
pp. 865-868, 2018. 
